Plotting (#16)
bcgov/ds-intro-to-python: course-content/32_graphical_depictions_of_data.qmd

        Plot all the things!
    </p>
</center>

## Introduction to matplotlib

`matplotlib` is the most widely used scientific plotting library in Python. For many data related purposes, the sub-library called `matplotlib.pyplot` is all that is necessary to use. A fantastic feature of the Jupyter environments is that anytime we create a plot, we can view it directly inline with our code, allowing us to make adjustments quickly and easily as we go along.

We will typically import this library with the name `plt`:

```{python}
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
```

Simple plots are then straightforward to create:

```{python}
x = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
y = [1, 8, 27, 64, 125]

plt.plot(x, y)
```

:::{.callout-tip}
## plt.show()

In Jupyter environments, running the cell that produces a plot will generate the figure directly below the code, and then the figure is saved with the notebook document for future viewing. However, other Python environments, such as an interactive Python session started from a terminal, or a Python script executed at the command line or within VSCode, require an additional command to display the figure. To do this, we use the basic call:

```python
plt.show()
```

> This command can also be used within a Notebook - for instance to display multiple figures if they are created within a single cell. We recommend as accepted practice to always include a call to `plt.show()` if you ever intend to show a plot, in a notebook or otherwise.

Reviewer: Can you demonstrate this? I think there might be confusion how to use it - does it get called after `plt.plot()`? Do you use it in place of `plt.plot()`? Does it take any arguments? etc...

Author: Good point! I'll add a brief example of what it does here.

:::

Plots typically require some set of values to supply to the x value, and an equal length set of values to supply to the y value. If we supply mismatched data, we will get an error:

```{python}
#| error: true
y = [1, 8, 27, 64]
plt.plot(x, y)
```

> In the above examples, we used lists of numbers to supply for our dataset. However, we can also use values directly from pandas dataframes. So let's work on a new dataset. Don't worry about the call to `seaborn` just yet - we will get there! For now, we just want to use it as a shortcut to a new dataset. This dataset looks at species of penguins, and compares various anatomical body part sizes to their species, location and sex. 

Reviewer: I think it's better to explain what seaborn is - eg., "Seaborn is another plotting library which we will learn how to use - but it also has a great built-in dataset that we are going to use to demonstrate matplotlib now, and seaborn later" or something like that

Author: Yeah good call. "Don't worry about..." is probably not something you want to see often in an intro course!

Let's try to look at the bills again, but this time with a more appropriate comparison plot:

```{python}
plt.scatter(penguins['bill_length_mm'], penguins['bill_depth_mm'])
plt.show()
```

That's looking better. But we still need to clean up our plot a little bit. Matplotlib includes methods for adding axis labels, titles, legends and so on. The trick is in figuring out how to apply these methods to the right plot...

```{python}
plt.xlabel('Bill Length (mm)')
plt.ylabel('Bill Depth (mm)')
plt.title('Penguin Beaks')
plt.show()
```

What happened here! Matplotlib drew an axis for us, but neglected to include the data we had provided above. The key to this is in the way that matplotlib interprets the **current figure**. Anytime we begin a plot method with `plt.method()...`, matplotlib recognizes this plot instruction to be part of the current figure. Matplotlib will then go through all of the plot instructions one-by-one, adding each individual piece to the current figure. This continues until we hit the `plt.show()` line, which tells the program we are done adding to this plot, and any new commands should belong to a new plot. 

:::{.callout-tip}
## Jupyter vs. Python

> There is a slight distinction between how Jupyter will handle figures vs. how a Python script wil handle figures. When Jupyter hits the end of a `cell` or codeblock, it will automatically show the figure at the end of the output, regardless of it `plt.show()` was called or not. This is equivalent to calling `plt.show()` however - a new codeblock will not recognize the code used to create this plot in a new cell. 

Reviewer 2: There is a slight distinction between how Jupyter will handle figures vs. how a Python script will handle figures. When Jupyter hits the end of a `cell` or codeblock, it will automatically show the figure at the end of the output, regardless of whether `plt.show()` was called or not. This is equivalent to calling `plt.show()` however - a new codeblock will not recognize the code used to create this plot in a new cell.

plt.title('Penguin Beaks')
plt.legend()

# show our plot
plt.show()
```
:::

## Plotting Directly From Pandas

That was a lot of work to make a relatively straightforward plot. While matplotlib is extremely versatile, this same versatility comes at the expense of having to tweak the underlying code frequently to make the plots look the way that we want. Luckily, there exist other libraries that have been built on top of matplotlib that take care of much of the abstraction, so we can get directly to looking at our results as fast as possible! 

One extremely straightforward way to plot is directly from pandas, which implicitly uses `matplotlib.pyplot` in the background. 

```{python}
penguins.plot.scatter(x = 'bill_length_mm', y = 'bill_depth_mm')
plt.show()
```

For some plot types, we are also given the ability to provide a grouping category.

```{python}
penguins.plot.hist(column='flipper_length_mm', by='sex')
plt.show()
```

While pandas provides a straightforward way to quickly look at the data, it is fairly limited, and we will still end up needing to default back to matplotlib methods to get high-quality plots. The next package will help with this! 

> ## Introduction to Seaborn

Reviewer: It is worth considering whether to only teach `seaborn`. In R, we only teach `ggplot2`, not base plotting... and in practice I almost never use base plotting - maybe with the exception of histograms. If you think the content is too long and/or you think learners would be sufficiently armed if they left only having learned `seaborn`, it might be worth it.

Author: I think that the fundamental understanding gained from knowing how plots are built in matplotlib makes it important to have that first section. All of Seaborn is built on matplotlib and so if they want to do anything even remotely more complicated than the base figure level Seaborn plots then a base knowledge of matplotlib will be useful. 

However, depending on how long the course is getting, I'm happy to dump the pandas plotting section. Probably worth coming back to after we finish more sections and have gauged what we think the course length is.

```{python}
import seaborn as sns
sns.set_theme()
```

Within seaborn, we will focus on three main plot types:

 * Relational plots 
 * Distributions
 * Categorical plots

All three of these modules have a higher figure-level interface (`relplot`, `displot`, `catplot`) that have options to produce the different subvarieties. They also have an axes-level interface (for example, `histplot` inside the `displot` category) that allows for more control over the matplotlib backend being used to produce the plot. For our purposes, we will stick to the high level interface as it is capable of producing beautiful plots with a few simple commands. 

<center>
    <img src="images/plotting/seaborn_categories.png" 
    width="70%" style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
        Seaborn plot categories. 
    </p>
</center>

:::{.callout-tip collapse="true"}
## Advanced Tip - Figure vs. Axes Level?

<center>
    <img src="images/plotting/fig_axes.png" 
    width="50%" style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
        Matplotlib Figures 
    </p>
</center>

> You will notice that I mentioned **figure** vs. **axes** level interfaces for seaborn. This is a small but subtle distinction that is worth explaining in more detail. When we introduced matplotlib, we explained that you can create multiple different plots all on the same figure. This is because matplotlib plots are individually drawn onto a common **axis**, but each individual plot does not own the axis, titles, legends, and so on. Matplotlib produces a base axis, then draws each individual plot on top, and then adds the extra pieces as requested. All the accompanying *fluff* (title, legend) that surrounds the axis is part of the overall **figure**, which we set with commands such as `plt.xlabel()`, `plt.title()` and so on. 

Reviewer 2: "fluff" - love that!

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning sns.set_style() options?

Author: Sure thing, I can add it when I mention the set_theme method.

So a figure can be thought of as the overall container holding each plot and accompanying axis labels. In seaborn, the figure-level interface we will be using is just this - figure-level. It is a 'finished product.' Producing a plot via the `relplot`, `displot`, and `catplot` methods will produce an entire figure, complete with titles, legends, and anything else we might specify, such as the figure size. However, this entire figure is no longer easily accessible like a matplotlib axis is (we cannot add a plot like this to a different set of matplotlib plots, for example). 

> This can be useful as it will simplify the amount of code needed to create a report-ready figure. However, the drawback is that it reduces the lack of customizability we have to work with. So if we wish to work with customizable axes that we can quickly drop into more complex matplotlib plots, we should use the axes-level interface (eg. using `sns.scatterplot()` instead of `sns.relplot()`). If we want to produce standard statistical plots, the figure-level interface is the recommended tool as they produce cleaner plots. 

Reviewer 2: This can be useful as it will simplify the amount of code needed to create a report-ready figure. However, the drawback is that it reduces the customizability we have to work with. So if we wish to work with customizable axes that we can quickly drop into more complex matplotlib plots, we should use the axes-level interface (eg. using `sns.scatterplot()` instead of `sns.relplot()`). If we want to produce standard statistical plots, the figure-level interface is the recommended tool as they produce cleaner plots.

Check out the [Seaborn tutorial](https://seaborn.pydata.org/tutorial/function_overview.html) for more details on the differences between these methods! 

:::

> Before we dive into the particulars, here's a wonderful one line command to show just how powerful seaborn can be!

Reviewer 2: I like how you show this rather elegant and diagnostic visualization! Python is not just maths and loops.

```{python}
#| layout-ncol: 2
sns.relplot(data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm', hue='bill_length_mm')
plt.show()

sns.relplot(data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm', size='bill_length_mm')
plt.show()
```

We can also mix and match multiple different styling choices. Note that here, we want to be cautious about creating our plots using too many different styling choices. While informative, they can be tricky to interpret if we use too many all at once. 

```{python}
#| layout-ncol: 2
sns.relplot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm', 
    hue='species', style='species'
    )
plt.show()

sns.relplot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm', 
    hue='sex', size='bill_length_mm'
    )
plt.show()
```

:::{.callout-tip}
## Reminder: Use Multiple Lines!

In that last example you'll notice that I broke the code up for the plot onto multiple lines. When you start to have many arguments being supplied to a function, it is often a good idea to put different arguments on different lines for readability. As long as argument stays with the brackets, you can use as many lines or indentations as you want! 
:::

> If we want to avoid using too many different styling choices, but we would still like to understand how our features vary across different categories, we can make multiple plots using the built in `FacetGrid` class features of the `relplot` objects. 

Reviewer: I think this needs clarification - i.e., what is a `FacetGrid` class and how do we use it? It looks like it's enabled by specifying `row` and `col` arguments, but I think this needs a bit more explicit explanation

Author: Ha 100%. Should definitely not just throw the term FacetGrid in there with no context.

```{python}
g = sns.relplot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm',
    col='species', row='island', hue='sex',
    height=2.5
)
g.set_titles(size=8)  # include this line because the titles will overlap otherwise!
plt.show()
```

Finally, a frequent goal of creating a scatter plot is to identify if there is a trend in the data. Seaborn offers an extra method, `lmplot`, to allow for quick viewing of best fit lines (including confidence interval estimates) in our datasets:

```{python}

> sns.lmplot(data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', y='flipper_length_mm', hue='sex')

Reviewer: I think it's important to point out that because you have specified a third categorical dimension (hue), it uses that as a grouping variable and provides a line for each sex

 * Is the data skewed?
 * Do we have outliers?
 * How do different subsets compare?

Using the `displot` method, we can access multiple different styles of plots to answer these questions. While Seaborn can (and does) get into multivariate distributions, let us stick to univariate distributions: **histograms** and **kernel density estimation (KDE)**.

The default `displot` option will produce a histogram of whichever column we choose in our dataset:

```{python}
sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm')
plt.show()
```

Seaborn automatically chooses what it feels is a reasonable number of bins for the dataset, but this is of course customizable via either the `binwidth` or the `bins` arguments, which will force the width or number of bins, respectively.

```{python}
#| layout-ncol: 2

sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', binwidth=1)
plt.show()

sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', bins=5)
plt.show()
```

Just like with our relational plots, we can also condition our histograms on other features, colouring each member of the category separately. 

```{python}
sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', hue='sex')
plt.show()
```

> The default here is to create an overlapping histogram, but we could create stacked histograms, dodged histograms, or even use the column option to produce multiple plots! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default here is to create an overlapping histogram, but we could create stacked histograms, dodged (side-by-side) histograms, or even use the `col` or `row` options to produce multiple plots! 
```

```{python}
#| layout-ncol: 2
sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', hue='sex', multiple='stack')
plt.show()

sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', hue='sex', multiple='dodge')
plt.show()
```

```{python}
sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', col='sex', height=3.5)
plt.show()
```

While the histogram option provides the exact count of the underlying values contained in our dataset, sometimes we may wish to approximate the distribution of data. This is done using kernel density estimation, which plots a smooth, continuous density estimate. Just like with the relational plots, we can access this new plot type using the `kind='kde'` option. 

```{python}
sns.displot(data=penguins, x='flipper_length_mm', kind='kde')
plt.show()
```

> Just like we were able to adjust the bin sizes for the histogram, we can adjust the 'bandwidth' of our estimation. This will vary the amount of noise that is included in the end distribution:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like we were able to adjust the bin sizes for the histogram, we can adjust the 'bandwidth' of our estimation. This will vary the amount of smoothing that is applied in the end distribution:
```

Just a minor suggestion, I feel like "noise" doesn't quite fit here

:::{.callout-warning icon="false"}
## Challenge 3

Create a KDE plot of body mass. Does it appear to be bi-modal (2 peaks)? If so, create another plot (or more) to identify what may be the cause. Are male penguins heavier? Is it a specific species? Does the island matter? 
:::

:::{.callout-note icon="false" collapse="true"}
## Solution to Challenge 3
First let's just look at the body mass variable alone. 

```{python}
sns.displot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', kind='kde'
    )
plt.show()
```

Hmm.. it's not immediately obvious that there might be two peaks here, but it does seem to skew a little bit to lower values. Let's see if looking at the different sexes gives us any more information:
```{python}
sns.displot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', kind='kde', hue='sex',
    fill=True  # Use fill to fill the KDE plot!
    )
plt.show()
```

Okay, weird. Splitting by sex does start to show two peaks, but it shows up in *both* male and female! So maybe it's the species where the peak is showing up?
```{python}
sns.displot(
    data=penguins, x='body_mass_g', kind='kde', hue='species', col='sex',
    fill=True 
    )
plt.show()
```

> Aha - looks like we found a key difference here! While male tend to be heavier than the females on average, there are distinctly different distributions for the three species, with the Gentoo penguins being heavier than both the Adelie and Chinstrap. Doing this sort of exploration via plot is always a useful tool to learn more about our data! 

Reviewer 2: Aha - looks like we found a key difference here! While males tend to be heavier than the females on average, there are distinctly different distributions for the three species, with the Gentoo penguins being heavier than both the Adelie and Chinstrap. Doing this sort of exploration via plot is always a useful tool to learn more about our data!

:::

### Categorical Plots

<center>
    <img src="images/plotting/bar_chart.png" 
    width="50%" style="margin:auto"/>
    <p style="text-align: center">
        Suspicious...
    </p>
</center>

Relational plots let us quickly view relationships between two sets of numerical features. Categorical plots will allow us to do the same where one (or both) of the features is categorical (divided into discrete groups). 

The `catplot` method will provide us a unified high-level interface to a variety of different plots. Here, we will focus on the one that you are most likely to use (but we will give the full list in the summary!), `barplots`.

> Bar plots are something that we are likely all familiar with, as human beings living in a society of.. people. In Seaborn, a barplot operates on the full dataset to obtain an estimate of some aggregation function (which is the **mean** by default). It will also default to providing an estimation of the confidence interval on its estimates. Just like with all of the other Seaborn plots, we can add an additional feature for free via the `hue` styling choice. 

Reviewer: I think this aggregation is worth empasizing as for me at least it's a bit unexpected (though a nice feature for sure). I wonder if it would be worth having an example of the default swarm _first_ (probably a plot type many haven't seen before, but is very handy), and then show if you use `kind='bar'` it aggregates those swarms?

Author: Good point, I didn't even think about the fact that it's quite a contextual leap. That's why extra eyes are so important! I added a bit here that I hope addresses this.

## Solution to Challenge 4

To get the count for each of the species, we need to make a countplot:

```{python}
sns.catplot(data=penguins, x='species', kind='count')
plt.show()
```

Done, in one line of code!

As a bonus, if we want to plot the data in descending order, we can pass a list of strings containing the categories to the `catplot` method:

```{python}
sns.catplot(
    data=penguins, x='species', 
    kind='count', 
    order=['Adelie', 'Gentoo', 'Chinstrap']
    )
plt.show()
```
:::

## Saving your Plots

We've now done all this work to make amazing incredible charts that produce stunning visuals for our datasets. Chances are, however that you do not want these images to live solely in your Jupyter notebook. You might want it for a presentation or a report. So, we need to save these images so we can access them outside of our Python environment. To do this we use the `plt.savefig()` method. This method will save the **currently open figure**. This is the figure that has not yet been shown on screen! Any call to save a plot must come *before* we display it via `plt.show()`, as this actually closes the figure so we can start our next one!  

> 

Reviewer 2: Do you mention being able to save the images by mouse-hovering then right-clicking?

Author: Can you do that in Jupyter? I've never been able to when in inline mode.

Reviewer 2: Sorry you're right, I reviewed in VS Code

Author: I'll leave it for now then to the tool we'll be using with them in the course!

:::{.callout-important}
## No Show and Tell! 

> This point is important enough that I am repeating it here. Always save your figure **before** showing it! 

Reviewer: Worth pointing out that this is because `show` clears the plotting device?

Author: Do I not say that somewhere? I thought I did in the matplotlib section... I can reiterate here however.

Reviewer: Yup, you definitely do, just think it's worth pointing out here again
